From:	"Chele" <smislime@EUnet.yu>  Add to Address BookAdd to Address Book
To:	alan@balkanology.com
Subject:	Alan1.doc
Date:	Wed, 8 Mar 2006 07:28:58 +0100

Dear Alan,

 

First and foremost, congratulations on your exquisite web site. It was one of the most pleasant surprises on the net in recent times. My name is Zoran C(ch)ekerinac and I live in Novi Sad. I was, needless to say, stunned by photos and your ability to put plain things in a few words, and to put them quite objectively. The latter is widely welcomed here as you probably know already. I told many of my friends about your site and got a lot of positive reactions, including “a foreign guy did that?!” (see about foreigners later). Most of my friends are about same age as me (47) and they consider themselves either too old (I’m not) or too busy to send you any comments, but, as a rule, my young friends are more opened and easy going – so Andrea has already contacted you regarding a trip to western Macedonia. She’s really a terrific kid and could help you a lot. As I see things, your work is probably more important than you think, at least concerning Serbia & Montenegro issues. So, I’ve decided to send you some suggestions, corrections and whatever. Most likely you’ll find few stuff really usable for the site itself, and maybe more of it just for your personal reference, or I’ll just bog you down with things you already know, so for now I’ll try to be concise. And it’s not on my strong side. I plan to send some photos (separately) as well, just to fulfill the info; some of the photos were taken with a camera allegedly made in German factory which was leveled by allied bombers in WWII . Damn foreigners.

Decades of cold war left a solid trace, especially on people of my age and older. The word foreign was at the time at least faintly connected with something strange, as in out of ordinary, and something that it’s bad to have contact with; somewhere around 1980 we started to travel more (I’ve crossed most of Europe and a little elsewhere) as the ex-country opened to the outside world. And just when it seems that things fit, another isolation (and worse) came, and it was again ‘blame it on foreigners’. It’s not something used to confront to a person itself, and that’s probably you were always warmly welcomed here; in its mildest form, it’s just a feeling that you are different, which doesn’t necessarily mean bad, but  it’s not good either. Of course, when I say ‘we’, I mean majority of the people here; me, I always try to look at things differently. It’s no big deal, but could explain why some travelers have had encounters which they tried to explain like “they are not accustomed to tourists”. In the other words, chances are that you’ll be an exotic character here for some time, and it may as well be part of, so to say, non-westernization, which is probably the main reason for some foreigners to visit this twisted country. Somewhere you said that Ireland is not a member  of NATO, so you couldn’t say if USA citizens could experience some troubles – that’s of no importance at all, because nobody here really knows that your country is not in NATO. You should all relax and enjoy being a foreigner.

A few words more on recent turmoil here. And I’ll again try to skip all that you’ve already read and heard. First, WHY? There are not very large number of people in whole ex---yu who would agree with me that it was only about money and power. Such huge wealth switch owners in such short period of time that it’s really unbelievable even for me, looking at it  constantly with my own eyes. Tradition, ancestors’ graves, Croats, Serbs, God,  homeland – for a bunch who really started all that, those were just  ways to manipulate more than 20 million people. It happens that the same people were listening to some other empty phrases for couple of decades and decide to change things. Well, we did make a change, didn’t we. Would you like a war story, or a present day one? OK, I’ll tell you one of each. In the village called Mirkovci, 5km from Vinkovci, Croatia, there was that guy (I know his name but it’s not important) who worked as a teacher in local elementary school. In 1989 or so he and his wife opened a booth near the school, selling notebooks, pencils and such stuff. When war broke out, he was appointed (or he appointed himself) as the commander of defense for this Serb populated village. He proved to be successful: people who didn’t get shot fled, never to return. He moved to Novi Sad, usurped a large space in the historic (and protected) city center and built ugly multilevel glass/concrete shopping mall and sold it (or part of it) for 2000 euros or so per sqm. Most likely it’s all legalized by now, and that’s only a small part of his business. And it’s not the end. The mall is called LUPUS and has a wolf head for emblem. Second part of the story is in Belgrade. A group of obscure characters was formed during Slobodan Milosevic reign to do some dirty work for the government, although the only official record about them is that they existed. Formally, they were dismissed in 2000, but can still be seen in the audience on a trial for murder of Serbian prime minister Zoran Djindjic – the prime suspect being one of them. Things in common? Tattoos and t-shirts with, you guess, the same wolf head. Concrete result? Well, the trial is going on for three years, and they couldn’t agree even to a simple thing like how many shots have been fired – two or three, despite a bunch of eyewitnesses. (Please, don’t quote me on any of these in public, or I could get shot. And it’s not a joke.) Second, modern day story is a love story. Brothers Karic, four of them, started their business with snow shovels in Pec, Kosovo. Lot of snow there, they expanded shovel empire rather quickly, getting very tempting loans (in dinars) in the time of enormous inflation rate (which ended at 331 million percent on a year basis, Jan 1994), and all the time preserving touchy friendship with S. Milosevic. It’s impossible to tell how much of Serbia they possess – TV stations, largest cell phone operator, banks, you name it. After Oct 2000, they fell in love with new government and they seem untouchable. Only recently, one of them decided to form a new political party, and gain rather lot of support in a short time. (People here love leaders, especially if they are “successful”). Of course, it was an immediate break down of a relationship, and brothers are literally on the run at this moment. It appears that there were tax frauds of at least 700 mil E, not to mention the rest of the stuff, and all that since 1997! And everybody knew about it all the time. Whatever big money was stolen, it was all OK until they probably had their first-time disagreement on the price of a new party. And I can’t stop asking myself what the hell was that price. Maybe we could work something out, all of us together, it’s too much fuss this way. Bribe, does it exist here? Well, the kind which worries me the most DOES, and it’s 2006, and it seems that nothing is getting better.

War and isolation brought misery here in more that one way, and some of it isn’t so obvious. Of course, more than 200000 dead and millions of refugees give a horrible picture, but that’s not the end. (By the way, one more shape of  manipulation are present dialogs on refugees, regarding Serbs from Croatia and Kosovo, mostly. The real truth is that NOBODY wants to go back, and neither authority in any country is eager to admit that.)  But what will be the biggest problem in many years to come is the influence of all this to the population of about 30 or younger. There is no official record, but it is estimated that some 400000 young people, most of them with a degree, left this country for good since the beginning of the 1990s. Several of my closest friends are now in Stuttgart, Rome, Chicago and Sydney and some of them never came for a visit since the day they left (it’s not yet clear how will military authorities cope with some specific situations in the past, because this country was never in a war, officially; and, guess, my friends were not careful regarding drafting and stuff – nobody wanted to go, except volunteers…) This probably contributed the fact that Serbia, if it was independent, has the fourth oldest population in the world, after Japan, Germany and Switzerland. Even worse, young people who stay here are facing total breakdown of elementary values of all kinds, and that already lasts too long. Recent inquiry shows that over 70% of Belgrade students have never travel anywhere outside S&M. To obtain visa is a nightmare, and without it we can travel to Croatia (not for long), Bosnia, Macedonia, Tunis and not much more. With average monthly wage of ca 250E and  prices you are familiar with, it’s truly for the intrepid only. Talking money, note that prices are on significant rise here (in euros, of course) – it refers mostly to the stuff you buy for everyday need in supermarket or so, but also for lodging, if you have the apartment of your own. I spent three weeks in Bol, Brac in July 2003 (magnificent island, isn’t it) – at that time an average visit to a supermarket was, say, about 30% dearer here, and now most of the prices are pretty much the same.

Well, maybe now you know a little bit better why I think your site is important for young people here. Enough with seedy sides.

You did say that languages here are a matter of discussion. In any serious foreign book, at least in those printed before 1990s, you’ll find that in ex-yu existed only three distinctive Southern Slavic languages: Serbocroatian or Croatoserbian, Macedonian and Slovenian. The first one could be called whatever you want, but it doesn’t change the fact that it’s very early for developing a separate language just because of political breakdown. Just for the record, on Brac locals thought that I’m from Eastern Slavonia (according to my accent and not by some words which ARE different, but BOTH of us KNOW BOTH versions,  and it’s just a matter of good will whether anybody will say that he or she doesn’t understand something). I had much more trouble with Vranje speech, from southern Serbia. At the end, Bosnian Serbs speak “language” which is much more similar to Croatian than to anything you’ll hear in Serbia. I work in publishing business since 1991 and nobody ever asked for or offered any translation of any book in either “language” combination. I’m not politically or in any other way biased to say this, but it IS one language with many dialects. As for me, you can call my language by any name and it doesn’t change anything; although it is likely that most Serbians and Croats will disagree with me – well, THEY are biased. The only reason for all this is that potential travelers shouldn’t be scared off by so many languages on a small space; there are enough complicated things here. By the way, dialect which was used as base for literary ‘official’ Serbian (as the territory of Serbia) is that of Uzice.

Ethnic groups could be a highlight here. Skip for now the known facts (Slovakians, Albanians, Hungarians…)  For example, several thousands of people in Kosovo used to declare themselves as Egyptians, allegedly they are descendants of slaves who worked in the mines there in middle age. Never met one. They speak Albanian, or Serbian or Roma (Gypsy) language. A group that doesn’t want to be mixed up with Roma are Ashkalijas (sing. Ashkalija, sh like in shop), although they share everything else with Roma. Small Greek community represents descendants of participants in a kind of communist revolution that failed in Greece in 1949 (comrade Markos, I think). In Kosovo, a remote valley high in Shara mountain is called simply Gora (mountain, poetically). Goranci claim no common heritage with either Serbs or Albanians, speak usually both languages and use to live in a very isolated community. It is unclear what happened to them after Kosovo conflict. You probably know that people from Boka Kotorska says that they are not like other Montenegrins, or not Montenegrins at all – it is fair to say that their dialect is strikingly similar to South Dalmatian. But did you know that there are a few family of, say, AfroBokeljans in Kotor? They were brought there by famous Illyrian queen Teuta, some 2200 years ago. And they all speak Montenegrian, with that looong accent. My favorite part of Serbia is East. It is less populated, the terrain is more rugged (like Montenegro), there are a lot of natural beauties, some nice monasteries and even Roman ruins. Ethnic group called Vlasi (sing. Vlah; photos) populates some part of the area, despite the fact that they lost almost all of their identity. They are descendants of  the tribes which lived in that area before Slavic invasion; apart from Serbs, they got a really strong Romanian influence. They are widely known for their mythical stories and legends. No Blarney stone, but has some resemblance. Unfortunately, few people care about these things today. It’s also the poorest part of Serbia, and the place where ex-yu economic migration to West Europe started at the beginning of 1960s. In those days, some houses in remote villages didn’t have doors and windows – just holes in the wall, usually covered with wooden planks in winter. Quite the opposite happened in 80s – all gastarbajters (we usually use this German name) built huge houses, mostly distasteful,  sometimes with pools and elevators, just to show off. It was for their kids, they said. Most of the emigrees died either abroad, in some gastarbajter housing, or in their villas after retiring, but majority of them forgot what it was all about: kids. All the children were raised (or born and raised) abroad and none of them wanted to go back to the country which they consider foreign. No wonder. You can buy some of that enormous monuments quite cheap. Other side of the same story is that some of them, to prevent all this, left their kids in Serbia to be raised by grandparents, but soon lost any real contact – such kids usually went on drugs and/or end up in jail. Note that this is not specialty of  that region only. When talking about Eastern Serbia, I can’t help remembering that somebody laughed at you, lacking children and pushing thirty. There you can be a granddad at 35 or so. On the contrary, cities in Vojvodina are packed with people who just forgot to marry (myself including). On recent birthday party, eight of us, age 35 to 49, had only one child, combined. And that’s sad. One more tip: there was a strange custom, apparently until recent times, in mountainous region of Montenegro and parts of Hercegovina and Dalmatian outback. If a family is lacking male children, it is a duty of one of the daughters, chosen by the rest of the family, to become a man. She does all the stuff men usually do – dress like man, drink rakija, smoke, arrange and organize family life, together with usual hard labour, and that often is the part of woman’s life there. They never marry. Strange? Not more than the rest, I think.

Having background, ethnicity and customs in mind, take my case, for example. As far as it is known, my ancestors moved from various parts of Serbia (then Ottoman Empire) to Vojvodina (then Austro-Hungarian Empire), mostly in 18th c. Usual excuse was that they had killed a Turkey; recently I’ve discovered that some of them were just thieves or adventurers, and, rightly so, one of them was murderer – he killed his close relative. (Bear in mind that in our language there are about 30 or so different names for various relatives, in English known as uncles, aunts, sisters, brothers and cousins. I prefer English version, they were all bunch of lunatics anyway).  Queen Maria Theresa really liked Vojvodina – it was a kind of buffer zone towards Turkey, and much of the people here fought in wars against Ottomans. She also add some more ethnicity – a number of Germans from Schwaben settled here (hence common Shvabe for all Germans), together with ‘domestic’ Hungarians, Czechs, Slovaks, Croatians, Jews, Armenians, Romanians, Gypsies, Ukrainians, Russians and god knows who else. The wildest of the colourful bunch were, instead to the gallows pole or prison, send to Srem, a southwest part of today’s Vojvodina (although geographically it also stretches a little bit further west, in Croatia, it’s Srijem there) – that was probably the hottest buffer zone. Exaggerated? Not a bit. Both my parents were born in Srem villages – you must admit that I have an exceptional gene pool. My mother’s village was torched down to the ground, all but four houses, by Croatian fascists in WW2. Out of 1100 villagers, little over 300 were killed in concentration camps (mostly Jasenovac), about same number died fighting in the war – more than half of the population.  And, nothing new, nobody learned anything from all that. Now I can make just a simple statement that a number of people who are talking to themselves has likely quadrupled in the streets in last ten years. No one can tell how crippled we really are after all this. But, that’s what it’s all about here. Nothing is prearranged, everything is possible, and, above all, everything appears somehow normal on the outside. And that’s probably that hardly describable reason why I like this crazy country (and it’s even not a proper country, yet). If  I really go bananas, nobody will notice. I like my great-great-grandmother, whom I never met; in her final days, on a deathbed, they asked her if she had a long life. Oh, not at all, she replied. It’s like I’ve entered one door and promptly exited the other. She lived from 1852 to 1953. Or, for instance, it appears normal that the distinguished doctor, born immediately after WW2, is named Lems (as given name). That name just doesn’t exist – but, think, it could be only in loving memory of Lenin, Engels, Marx and Stalin. Female name Mashinka (literally, machine gun) isn’t fashionable any more, but there are living people with that name. As well as Shporet (electric stove) or Tractor. You could easily meet Tarzan or even Jamesdin (wrong for James Dean, of course). And it’s quite possible that in my father’s village still lives somebody who remember that matches (plain, so called safety matches) were once called mashina (same word for machine but different accent). At that time, it  was clearly the most sophisticated  technical equipment in the village. And it was as yesterday… Do you still found the fact that somebody thinks that Jaffa cakes were invented in Crvenka weird? Ha-ha.

A tip more on ethnicity. According to the Constitution, both present and in ex-yu, a person can state his nationality in whatever way he wants. There were a lot of Yugoslavs, usually from mixed marriages, and cases where only territory matters – I could be Sremac, for example. But in 1991 census, as a view of resisting S. Milosevic and his policy, there were no less than 16 Martians and even two Citroens in Novi Sad only, among the rest of the items. By the way, you said no politics on your web site, and that’s OK, but you’ve missed a posted comment, somewhere besides pictures from Vojvodina, I think (some rubbish that Vojvodina won’t be a part of Serbia because of Hungarians). It’s both stupid and offensive.

A choice of the books on your site seems fine, but did you consider recommending some movies, too? A small list of works which could be informative (for a foreigner, of course), yet not lacking high artistic standards can be made easily. In older days, film noir was at its best with Cannes laureate I Met Some Happy Gypsies Too by Aleksandar Sasa Petrovic, and my favorite When I Am Dead and White by Zivojin Pavlovic. Several comedies from the opus of Slobodan Sijan and hilarious Balkan Spy  are practically a cult here. Work of Emir Kusturica is well known; I prefer his first and second features, multi-award winning Do You Remember, Dolly Bell and When Father Was Away on Business. Late Montenegrin director Zivko Nikolic gave excellent views of modern/traditional contrasts in Montenegro. Nice movies continued to appear even after breakup of yu. A couple of films by Goran Paskaljevic (such as Tango Argentino) and Goran Markovic (Tito and Me) are also worth a look (both of directors also worked in ex-yu). Macedonia had its moment with Oscar-winning Before the Rain, a truly unforgettable movie by Milco Mancevski. From Croatia came the little gem, The Red Dust by Zrinko Ogresta. Bosnia kept its specific and indescribable feeling (we also use this English word) with several features, particularly Danis Tanovic’ No Man’s Land. Srdjan Dragojevic, a cult director from Belgrade made an exceptional anti-war movie Pretty Villages, Pretty Flame. A recent must-see is definitely Red Colored Gray Truck, a whacked directorial debut for Sarajevo-born Belgrade screenwriter Srdjan Koljevic, with Berlin 2005 winner, Slovenian actress Aleksandra Balmazovic. For many years now, films from this part of Europe are made with that clever-stubborn-creative combination, which successfully overcomes lack of funding. And, yes, I’m a kind of movie buff, so if you like, I can give you more details and/or expand the list.

Some more places in S&M other than you have mentioned are worth exploring. You probably know Ravanica monastery, 10km from Cuprija, off Belgrade-Nis highway. Besides beauty (photo), it also has great historic importance. One of my favorites is small monastery of Gornjak, on regional road halfway between Petrovac and Zagubica (local buses stop). It has a dramatic setting (photos). The nicest cave in Serbia is Resavska, not far from Despotovac, accessible by car (or bus, within organized group). There are hourly tours in summer. There’s more, of course, on many of these places on some sites with links you’ve posted. Danube’s Djerdap gorge (although mostly an artificial lake today) is worth driving through (photo). Prohor Pcinjski monastery is on the very border with Macedonia (alternative border crossing, to the east of the main highway). There are local buses from Vranje. The monastery is very old, but nowadays the church is from 19th c (photo) and there are some new surrounding buildings, built completely in traditional style. It’s partly a hotel. One of the weirdest places in Serbia is probably Djavolja varos (Devil’s Town, photo), a strange eroded rock formation near Kursumlija. It can be reached on foot from Prolom Banja (good bus connections). It’s a pleasant walk, unless you get lost. I went there by car, not via Prolom Banja, but from the other side of the hill. There are some secondary volcanic activities nearby. I also found a makeshift shrine in the woods, which looked more like a pagan sanctuary – apparently, the place has magical powers. Probably mpetrovic of the Thorn Tree has more details. Several small but pretty monasteries lie next to each other in a gorge near Ovcar Banja, just beside main Cacak - Pozega road. In Montenegro, Ostrog monastery (photo) can be reached by local transport from Niksic. Rafting down the Tara and Drina rivers is rather well organized – for this one, try with Andrea; her mother, a very dear friend of mine,  went there last summer. Tara mountain (no relation to Tara river) is truly beautiful in any aspect. It can be reached by local bus from Uzice. There are plenty of  lodging in private homes, and during low season you could even rent a house for 20-30 E or so. My friend goes fishing there regularly, I could ask them for more details, if you like. Country tourism is rather well developed in the region of Golija, south of Ivanjica; nearby highland of Peshter is a place of rare beauty, something like Zlatibor but more wild and even scarcely populated. It’s also known as the coldest place in the Balkans - night temperatures in July are normally just a few degrees, in winter it usually falls to -35.  Spas are plentiful and info on them can be found easily. Vrnjacka Banja near Kraljevo is the oldest and still manage to maintain its charm. A vast, partly excavated remains of the Roman villa called Felix Romuliana (photo) lie within walking distance from Gamzigradska Banja, near Zajecar (local buses). In Vojvodina, several towns apart from Novi Sad managed to preserve at least parts of their 19th c city centers. Sombor and Subotica  are very pleasant places, with atmosphere even more relaxed than Novi Sad (one just get lazy immediately). Lake Palic, in Subotica’s suburb, is quite suitable for swimming, June to August. The water is cleaner than the Danube (which doesn’t say much, though). Finally, a few words on things you’ve missed in my hometown. Speaking about Danube, the main beach here is well maintained and it is said to be the nicest on the whole river. There are several old farms in the vicinity, nicely restored and converted to a restaurant or hotel. There are info on your links; I recommend Salas Number 137 (local bus to Cenej, about 8km north). Sadly, it seems that all tourist sites failed to give details on probably the weirdest festivity here – Kobasicijada (Sausage-ijada) in Turija, 40km north, just off Srbobran. It involves massive pig slaughtering, making sausages and other stuff, competition in various categories of mentioned products, usual village fair (partly turbo folk), and of course, eating. The organizers proudly state that they are current holders of the Guinness Record for the longest sausage. Every year they make new one, a meter longer, just to be sure. The last one was 2022m. The festival takes place usually on last weekend in February.

A few words about transport. Note that one of Belgrade-Bar night trains is actually Subotica-Bar, throughout the year. The real truth about Mala Rijeka (Small River) bridge is as follows: at the time it was built, one of its four supporting pillars was, at 137,5m, the tallest structure on any railway bridge in Europe. It remains so for just a couple of years. The tracks are exactly 200m above the riverbed, which is usually dry. At 498m, it’s also the longest bridge on the line. As for Yugo, well, it was good for Bruce Willis in Die Hard 3, and it’s OK for me. Mine didn’t fail for 17 years, until last summer – it just won’t start (and I was reluctant to go anyway). Seriously, it’s a kind of lottery – you just might get a good one. Some run for 300000km with no major repairing. And I won’t drive an expensive (foreign) car on a dirt road to Devil’s Town.

And tips on links. EXIT festival has new, significantly improved link. It definitely remains the greatest party here. Fresh news says that more than 20000 tickets were sold on March 6, first day of  sale. JAT has corrected a number of mistakes in their new site. (This one is not new – JAT stands for Joke About Time. Still better than in Madagascar, where locals nicknamed their air carrier, you guess, Air Mad).

There’s an interesting site, leksikon-yu-mitologije.net. It is a successful attempt to collect various items of popular culture and subculture which were commonly recognized throughout ex-country. The idea originated in Zagreb back in 1989 by Dubravka Ugresic and friends. It started as a small book, but after creating a site, everybody was called to participate. Thousands of people from ex-yu, mostly living abroad, sent countless notes on their memories, which were surprisingly universal. A new book was compiled last year. Famous footballers, TV shows, music band from the very beginnings, yu-hamburgers, fashion of the 60s and 70s, first bodybuilders, first “modern furniture” (every room in the country looked the same in beginning of  70s), jeans smuggled from Trieste - all that with real-socialistic setting – it offers surprisingly realistic and concise look into some 50 years of history. My friend’s teenage daughter, after reading the book, asked: “Mom, did you really live that way?!” And, of course, there’s the catch: the site is entirely in Serbian, as is the book.

And that’s about it. Sorry if I wasted your time, if you don’t find anything useful. If you do, then you’re probably masochistic as myself. Normally, feel  free to ask for something additional, but don’t  be alarmed if I need some time to answer – a part of me is still frozen in snail-mail realm, with no computer mumbo-jumbos.

Keep up the good work. Best regards,

 

Zoran

 

 

 

 

 

Pictures included:

1.      I bet you missed this one: the most stubborn pine tree in the Adriatic. Nerezisce, Brac (the oldest settlement on the island)

2.      and 3. Folk costumes from East Serbia. Ethno music and food festival, Novi Sad, usually last  weekend in June

4.   Ravanica monastery

5.   and 6. Gornjak monastery

7. The Danube, Djerdap gorge. Border stone said SFRJ once, then F was         scratched after changing the country’s name, but the newest change really got them: how the hell can we correct it now?

8.   Prohor Pcinjski

9.   Devil’s Town

10.   Ostrog cave monastery (photo is not mine)

11.   Roman ruins at Gamzigrad. Apparently, this was the guy’s bathroom

12.   Mud dance at EXIT 2005

