Hi Rob,

Glad to hear that you (and your parents) are taking advantage of your location to see some of the USA.

Having made the decision on the DSLR just a week ago I can pretty much give you a mind-dump of my thought process. I think the biggest decision is whether to go for a DSLR or a high-end non-DSLR like the Sony R1 (I believe "prosumer" is the rather horrible term for this class of camera). Although purists sometimes suggest that a DSLR is definitively "better", I don't think that's necessarily true for non-specialised users like us. The prosumers fit an awful lot into a convenient package, and there are some definite drawbacks to the SLR, like not being able to see the picture on the LCD screen until after taking it. After a lot of thought I decided that the SLR had the edge, mainly because of the chance to learn more and expand the system by getting new lenses rather than a whole new camera.

Over the last couple of years the fall in DSLR prices has been incredible. I suspect it is not just a matter of technology but of strategy - the likes of Canon may be trying to draw new users into the DSLR market so they can sell them multiple lenses over a period of many years. Having read a lot of reviews it seems that the entry-level DSLRs from the main manufacturers are all excellent cameras, with no obvious stand-out (good or bad). I didn't look beyond the cheapest model in each range (hence no 20D), as I felt that the "extras" were not really worth anything for an amateur like me - it seemed better to save the equivalent amount towards a new lens at some stage.   

That left me considering the Canon 350D, Nikon D50, Konica-Minolta 5D, and Olympus E500 (some of which may have different names on your side of the pond). I felt that the Canon was overpriced (at least over here) relative to the others - maybe worth paying for someone who already has Canon lenses, but not for me. The olympus looked very interesting but turned out to be hard to track down in Dublin, and I didn't want to buy without holding it in my hand. I ended up spending quite a while in the shop with the Nikon in one hand and the Minolta in the other. I ended up going for the Minolta mainly because my previous camera, which I loved, was also a Minolta. I particularly liked its unique anti-shake system, so that swayed me in its favour. It is a bit of a risk, as Minolta has sold its DSLR business to Sony and the future is rather uncertain. Sony say they intend to grab 25% of the market, which should guarantee a good supply of compatible accessories. But I can't help remembering that these are the people who brought us such technological dead-ends as Betamax and the Minidisc.

Hope that helps rather than hinders. I am off to Greece tomorrow to give the D5 a thorough test. Rumour has it that it is in fact possible to take photos near one's own home, but it's never really worked for me!

Take care
Alan